“Did she have a weight problem?” asked my four-year-old son Ramu.“No, she didn’t. She went for a long walk and strayed1 into the 1. strayed: moved away forest. Soon, she discovered that she was lost.” from a familiar place“If she’d had a cell phone, she could have called her mother,” said my six-year-old niece Janaki.“Don’t be stupid. They had no cell phones in those days,” said Ambu.‘Oh, so it was that long ago!’ exclaimed Janaki, as if 	2. ante-diluvian: period of time that the pre-cell phone era belonged to the ante-diluvian2 preceded the great Flood of Noah, according to the Bible (used jocularly) days.‘The poor thing came to a cottage that belonged to the three bears. She was so hungry that she made straight for the dining room. There, on a table, were three cups of porridge. She had a sip from Father Bear’s cup. It was too hot. Mother Bear’s porridge was too cold. But the porridge in Baby Bear’s cup was just right. So she drank the Baby Bear’s porridge.’ ‘Actually, I think Goldilocks is a murder mystery,’ said Ambu.Her reading consisted of a staple diet of thrillers and romances, and her thoughts tended towards the macabre3. This was too much even for me, indulgent4 mother though I was. ‘A 	murder mystery! How can you be so stupid?’	3. macabre: fearful‘Well, how do we know it wasn’t murder mystery? I’ve only heard your version of it. How do I know you haven’t edited out all the interesting bits, simply because you don’t approve of murder stories? I think Goldilocks was an heiress. The house in the forest belonged to the person who stood to inherit the property if she died. Seeing her go into the forest, he must have put a bowl of poisoned porridge in the cottage. She must have drunk the porridge and died. 4. indulgent: one who 	The bears are only your 	allows others to do or have what they want invention.’ The little ones were drinking in her words with awe5. Clearly, her version excited them more than mine did. Maybe Goldilocks was not the right choice. I would tell them some other story. I began the story of Red Riding Hood.‘Red Riding Hood took a basket full of cakes and 5. awe: wonder went off to visit her grandmother, who lived all ? Why do you think the mother starts alone in the forest.’ narrating some other story?‘Humans shouldn’t encroach on forest land,’ said the environmentally conscious Janaki.‘On the way, Red Riding Hood met a wolf and told it where she was going. The wolf took a short cut to her grandmother’s house and frightened off the old lady. The wolf then dressed in Grandma’s clothes. Presently, Red Riding Hood arrived. She looked at the wolf and said, “Grandma, why are your ears so big?”’ Ambu snorted, ‘If one of us had mistaken a wolf for Grandma, we’d have been eaten by Grandma, even if the wolf had spared us.’The India BookmarkThe world's oldest continuously narrated folk stories may be India's Jataka Tales. These stories were carved on the walls of Buddhist monuments such as Sanchi Stupa nearly 2,000 years ago so that people could "read" stories even if they could not read words.Even the youngest was shaking his head in disbelief. ‘Grandmas don’t look like wolves, do they?’ he asked. My mother was watching me carefully. I could sense an air of hostility6 gathering against me.	6. air of hostility: feeling of unfriendliness‘Of course, grandmothers don’t look like wolves. Forget Red Riding Hood, I’ll tell you the story of Cinderella.’‘Oh mother! not that simpering7 idiot who waited all her life for Prince Charming to save her. She could have escaped her stepmother by getting herself a good education and job,’ said Ambu. ‘How could she have gone to school, when she was made to do all the housework by her stepmother?’ I had her there.	7. simpering: foolish‘She could have gone to night school. Anyway, mother, why are all the daft8 persons in your ?Do you think some of the stories that we read reinforce stereotypes?stories girls? Who wrote these stories with a gender bias9?’ Ambu asked indignantly.	8. daft; sillyIt was difficult enough trying to keep three children out of mischief by telling them stories. It didn’t help if one had to be politically correct too. I had to think of a story where the Janaki.I fled. 	– Suganthy Krishnamacharicircle of the correct answer in the OMR sheet. What is the mother doing at the beginning of the story?Cooking food 	(b) Telling stories 	(c) Reading a book 	(d) Teaching mathsHow does the mother feel when the children keep questioning?Happy 	(b) Proud 	(c) Challenged 	(d) AngryWhat happens to each new story the mother tells?It is accepted 	(b) It is ignored 	(c) It is questioned again 	(d) It is shortenedWhat does the storytelling session turn into?A game 	(b) A debate 	(c) A lesson 	(d) A testWhat do the children find in the traditional stories?Fun and games 	  	(b) Illogical ideas and stereotypes  	(c) Difficult words 	  	(d) New facts and knowledgeWrite ‘T’ for true and ‘F’ for false statements. CG:2, C:2.2	Critical ThinkingThe mother continues telling stories without any difficulty. Venku says grandmothers often look like wolves. The mother becomes confused when the children question her. The story highlights the change in thinking between generations. After Goldilocks, the narrator starts telling the story of Red Riding Hood. Find lines from the story that tell you: 	CG:2, C:2.2	Critical ThinkingAmbu made fun of the strange name “Goldilocks.”Janaki connected the old story with modern times.	Go back to The younger children were impressed by Ambu’s version of the story.	the story and copy only the  4. The narrator felt that the children were turning against her stories. exact relevant  	5. Ambu objected to gender stereotyping in old stories.	line.Answer the following questions  	CG:2, C:2.2	Critical ThinkingDid the children accept the stories told by the mother? Give examples.What objections did the children raise during the story of Cinderella?How did the mother finally react to the children’s questioning?How does the behaviour of the children affect the flow of the story?Describe how the children used modern knowledge to question the stories.Describe how the story of Goldilocks was questioned by the children.Why did the children find Red Riding Hood’s behaviour unrealistic?	Put on Your Thinking Caps	 	/In the chapter, children question stories and challenge accepted ideas. Now think beyond the story. Read the situations below and respond thoughtfullyIf students started questioning everything taught in school, what positive and negative changes might occur?Imagine a world where no one questioned anything. What kind of society would it become?Do you think questioning elders shows disrespect or intelligence? Justify your answer with examples.Identify one commonly accepted belief (e.g., ‘marks decide intelligence’) and question it logically.	Dictionary & Vocabulary Skills	  	/Different kinds of texts belong to different literary genres. Use a dictionary to understand the meaning of each genre and identify its features. 	Read the descriptions carefully and match each literary genre with its correct definition.GenreDescription1. Fictiona. A text that presents facts, real events, and accurate information2. Non-Fictionb. A traditional story passed down orally through generations3. Folktalec. A text that provides factual information about a topic4. Biographyd. A story created from the writer's imagination5. Informational Texte. The written account of a person's life written by someone elseComplete the sentences using suitable words or phrases from the box. You may use a dictionary if needed.Word Boxante-diluvian, genetically modified, detective stories, overprotective mother, gender bias,  	staple diet, environmentally aware, air of tension, encroachSome people believe that using a typewriter is quite __________ in today’s digital age.My younger brother and his friends enjoy reading only __________.My grandmother often says that my mother is an __________ because she always supports and protects me.Dal and roti form the __________ of many people in our country.Even though the match ended a week ago, there was still an __________ between the two teams.Preventing girls from joining certain professions, such as the armed forces, is a clear example of __________.Many __________ individuals are making efforts to protect and conserve the Earth.The use of __________ seeds is still debated and not accepted everywhere.Wild animals sometimes turn dangerous when humans __________ on their natural habitats.	Grammar Lab	  	/You know that an adverb is a word that modifies a verb, an adjective or another adverb.Most adverbs tell us how, where or when something is done. In other words, they describe the manner, place, time, reason, frequency or degree of an action. Here are some examples:examplesadverbstypes1.  Mr Das drives slowly.slowlymanner (answers the question: how)2. The meeting is going to take place      there.thereplace (answers the question: where)3.  I met her yesterday.yesterdaytime (answers the question: when)4.  She is unwell, hence absent.hencereason (answers the question: why)5. Teesta never comes to play in the      evening.neverfrequency (answers the question: how often)6. We are extremely tired after the       trip.extremelydegree (answers the question: how much)Pick out the adverbs in these sentences and state their type.The novel was very interesting.He often visits his grandparents.	Ask how, My father gifted me a poetry book yesterday.	when, where, why, how She looked everywhere for her bag.	often, or how The baby slept soundly after eating the porridge.	much to find the adverb The boy answered the question confidently.	type.She was ill, hence she stayed at home.The water is too cold to drink.‘What strange creature is this? We have never seen anything like it before!’‘Do not be afraid. I have been sent to rule over you all.’‘From today, all of you must obey me without question.’‘This voice… it sounds familiar!’Why did the other animals accept the jackal as their king?What caused the jackal’s downfall?What is the tone of the statement: ‘Do not be afraid. I have been sent to rule over you all.’ 	(a) Humble 	(b) Commanding 	(c) Fearful 	(d) Confused	Speaking Skills	 	CG:2, C:2.2	Critical ThinkingTraditional fairy tales often rely on magic to solve problems. Imagine a fairy-tale character who uses intelligence, education, creativity, and hard work instead of magic.Create a short story around your character. In your story:Introduce the character.Describe a difficult problem or challenge.Explain how the character solves it using knowledge, skills, or determination.Conclude with the lesson learnt.Narrate your story to the class in 3-4 minutes.	Writing Skills	  	CG:2, C:2.2	Critical ThinkingChoose any one story mentioned in the chapter (Goldilocks, Cinderella, Red Riding Hood).Rewrite it from a logical and modern perspective in 120–150 words, addressing: 	• Scientific reasoning 	• Gender equality 	• Real-life practicalityCompetencies Beyond Interconnected Learning with ICT  CG:2, C:2.2 Critical Thinking Today, information comes from many sources. Tick the sources that should be checked carefully before believing them.A science textbookA forwarded social media messageA government websiteA message shared in a family group A news report from a trusted newspaperA video with no source or evidenceInformation from an official educational websiteAn unknown internet post  SEL Corner  Healthy Relationships CG:2, C:2.2 Critical Thinking ῀Your family follows a belief that you find illogical. How will you:Respect their feelings	•   Express your opinion	•   Avoid conflictHow would you respond if someone disagrees with your opinion?Interrupt them 	• Listen carefullyMake fun of them 	• Ask questions respectfully	 Explore 	CG:2, C:2.2	Critical ThinkingAuthors such as Sudha Murty, Ruskin Bond, R. J. Palacio, Jacqueline Wilson, Onjali Q. Raúf, and David Walliams often present modern ideas and realistic characters in their stories. Research any one of these authors and explore how their writing reflects contemporary values and perspectives.Find out:A brief account of the author's lifeTwo or three well-known books written by the authorThe themes explored in the storiesScan & LearnScan the QR code to access Ask questions, clear yout the worksheet for this doubts, and learn more with chapter.AI.How the author's characters or ideas differ from those found in traditional fairy tales
